##Guernica

Guernica, a large black-and-white oil painting executed by Spanish artist Pablo Picas. so. ##i. ##n 1937 following the German bombing of Guernica, a city in Spain’s Basque region. #The co. mplex. ##paint. ##ing received mixed reviews when it was shown in the Spanish Republic Pavilion at t. he world. ##’s fair in. ##Paris, but it became an icon as it traveled the world in ensuing years, ra. ising contro. ##versies on it. ##s meaning and its rightful home. #Picasso was living in Paris when. the Spanish Repu. ##blican government. ##approached him in 1937 with a commission to produce a mural. for their pavilion. ##in that year’s world. ##’s fair. #Spain was six months into its civil war—a m. ilitary revolt undertak. ##en by the Nationalists a. ##gainst the government—and the Republicans saw. the international event as. ##an opportunity to assert it. ##s legitimacy and to condemn the brutal. tactics of Gen. #Francisco Fr. ##anco’s Nationalist army. #Picass. ##o, who rarely mixed politics a. nd art, accepted. #Several months. ##later, German aircraft, at the reque. ##st of the Nationalists,. heavily bombed the city of Guernica. ##on April 26. #The three-hour long blitzk. ##rieg nearly anni. hilated the city and killed or wounded o. ##ne-third of the population. #Coverage of the. ##devastat. ion set Picasso to work on the commission, a. ##nd he completed the enormous painting (11. #5 ×. ##2. 5. #5 feet [3. #49 × 7. #77 metres]) in about th. ##ree weeks. #Displayed near the entrance of the R. ep. ##ublican’s pavilion, Guernica was the first thi. ##ng many visitors saw. #The complex compositi. on, with P. ##icasso’s characteristic Cubist figures and. ##disquieting representation of space, was. not easy to read. ##. #A braying horse occupies the painti. ##ng’s centre, stumbling over its falle. n rider sprawled below an. ##d lit by the spiked rays of a ligh. ##t bulb above. #A bellowing bull o. n the left seems to encompass a w. ##ailing mother with her child l. ##aying slack in her arms. #A g. hostly figure emerges from an opening to. ##the right, holding a gaslig. ##ht, while a woman closer. to the foreground hangs her arms in despair. #Fa. ##rther back, flames and. ##possibly ruins consume. a howling figure. #The dramatic subject is subdued, pa. ##inted in the grisai. ##lle technique, a m. ethod using a neutral monochrome palette. #Picasso said very li. ##ttle about the. ##painting’s mean. ing, leaving interpretation to viewers, critics, and art historians. #. ##Although cl. ##ear as an e. motional response to war’s senseless violence, the painting, with its mismatch. ##ed subj. ##ects, c. onfounded world’s fair viewers. #Whether it was successful as a political statement be. ##cam. ##e a. debate among scholars. #When the world’s fair ended, the Spanish Republic toured Guernica thr. #. #. ##oughout Scandinavia and England to raise awareness and funds for their cause. #In 1939, however, t. h. ##e. ##y conceded to the Nationalists. #Picasso vehemently refused to allow the painting to resid. e in. ##Spain. ##while Franco ruled, declaring that “the painting will be turned over to the governm. ent of t. ##he Spani. ##sh Republic the day the Republic is restored in Spain. #” Thus began the pai. nting’s long. ##exile. #Fea. ##ring the Nazi occupation of France, Picasso loaned Guernica to the Mu. seum of Modern. ##Art (MoMA) in Ne. ##w York City, which toured the painting throughout the United S. tates and elsewher. ##e for nearly 20 year. ##s after. #As the painting traveled, it grew in fame, i. nciting heated debate. ##on Picasso’s art and lit. ##erary sources, working process, and the symboli. sm of its subjects, among. ##other topics. #Pablo Picass. ##o: Guernica
Picasso died in 1973, two ye. ars before Franco and never. ##witnessed the painting’s return. ##to Spain. #After years of negotiat. ions, MoMA restored Guernica to. ##Spain in 1981, where it was housed. ##in the Casón del Buen Retir. o, an annex of the Prado Museum in. ##Madrid. #In 1992 the painting was mov. ##ed several blocks to. the Museo Nacional Centro de Arte Rei. ##na Sofía (called the Reina Sofía), Spain’s. ##newly establi. shed national museum dedicated to 20th-ce. ##ntury art. #The move was controversial as it. ##defied. Picasso’s expressed desire that the painting. ##hang amid the Prado’s great masterpieces. #Sourc. ##. e

https://www.britannica.com/topic/Guernica-by-. ##Picasso...
