##What would be the best way today to protest against a war. #How could you influence the largest n. um. ##ber of people. #In 1937, Pablo Picasso expressed his outrage against war with Guernica, his en. ormous. ##mural-sized painting displayed to millions of visitors at the Paris World’s Fair. #It has. since bec. ##ome the twentieth century’s most powerful indictment against war, a painting that still. feels intens. ##ely relevant today. #Antiwar icon

Much of the painting’s emotional power comes fro. m its overwhelmin. ##g size, approximately eleven feet tall and twenty five feet wide. #Guernica is. not a painting you ob. ##serve with spatial detachment; it feels like it wraps around you, immerses. you in its larger-than-li. ##fe figures and action. #And although the size and multiple figures refe. rence the long tradition of E. ##uropean history paintings, this painting is different because it ch. allenges rather than accepts the. ##notion of war as heroic. #So why did Picasso paint it. #Commissi. on

In 1936, Picasso (who was Spanis. ##h) was asked by the newly elected Spanish Republican governm. ent to paint an artwork for the Spanish. ##Pavilion at the 1937 Paris World’s Fair. #The official th. eme of the Exposition was a celebration of. ##modern technology. #Yet Picasso painted an overtly pol. itical painting, a subject in which he had sho. ##wn little interest up to that time. #What had happ. ened to inspire it. #Crimes against humanity: an a. ##ct of war

In 1936, a civil war began in Spain. between the democratic Republican government and fasc. ##ist forces, led by General Francisco Franc. o, attempting to overthrow them. #Picasso’s painting is ba. ##sed on the events of April 27, 1937, w. hen Hitler’s powerful German air force, acting in support of F. ##ranco, bombed the village of Guern. ica in northern Spain, a city of no strategic military value. #It. ##was history’s first aerial satu. ration bombing of a civilian population. #It was a cold-blooded train. ##ing mission designed to tes. t a new bombing tactic to intimidate and terrorize the resistance. #For o. ##ver three hours, twenty. five bombers dropped 100,000 pounds of explosive and incendiary bombs on the. ##village, reducing i. t to rubble. #Twenty more fighter planes strafed and killed defenseless civilian. ##s trying to flee. . #The devastation was appalling: fires burned for three days, and seventy percent o. ##f the city w. as destroyed. #A third of the population, 1600 civilians, were wounded or killed. #Picas. ##so hears. the news

On May 1, 1937, news of the atrocity reached Paris. #Eyewitness reports filled th. ##e fr. ont pages of local and international newspapers. #Picasso, sympathetic to the Republican governm. ##. ent of his homeland, was horrified by the reports of devastation and death. #Guernica is his visual.. ##response, his memorial to the brutal massacre. #After hundreds of sketches, the painting was done. in. ##less than a month and then delivered to the Fair’s Spanish Pavilion, where it became the cent. ral at. ##traction. #Accompanying it were documentary films, newsreels and graphic photographs of fa. scist brut. ##alities in the civil war. #Rather than the typical celebration of technology people ex. pected to see. ##at a world’s fair, the entire Spanish Pavilion shocked the world into confronting t. he suffering of t. ##he Spanish people. #Later, in the 1940s, when Paris was occupied by the Germans. , a Nazi officer visi. ##ted Picasso’s studio. #“Did you do that. #” he is said to have asked Picass. o while standing in front. ##of a photograph of the painting. #“No,” Picasso replied, “you did. #”. World traveler

When the fai. ##r ended, the Spanish Republican forces sent Guernica on an internati. onal tour to create awareness of. ##the war and raise funds for Spanish refugees. #It traveled the w. orld for 19 years and then was loan. ##ed for safekeeping to The Museum of Modern Art in New York. #. Picasso refused to allow it to return t. ##o Spain until the country “enjoyed public liberties and d. emocratic institutions,” which finally occu. ##rred in 1981. #Today the painting permanently resides. in the Reina Sofía, Spain’s national museum of. ##modern art in Madrid. #What can we see. #This pai. nting is not easy to decipher. #Everywhere there s. ##eems to be death and dying. #As our eyes adjus. t to the frenetic action, figures begin to emerge. #On. ##the far left is a woman, head back, scream. ing in pain and grief, holding the lifeless body of her d. ##ead child. #This is one of the most dev. astating and unforgettable images in the painting. #To her ri. ##ght is the head and partial body of. a large white bull, the only unharmed and calm figure amidst the. ##chaos. #Beneath her, a dead or. wounded man with a severed arm and mutilated hand clutches a broken. ##sword. #Only his head and arm. s are visible; the rest of his body is obscured by the overlapping and. ##scattered parts of other f. igures. #In the center stands a terrified horse, mouth open screaming in p. ##ain, its side pierced. by a spear. #On the right are three more women. #One rushes in, looking up at. ##the stark light bul. b at the top of the scene. #Another leans out of the window of a burning house, h. ##er long extende. d arm holding a lamp, while the third woman appears trapped in the burning building,. ##screaming in. fear and horror. #All their faces are distorted in agony. #Eyes are dislocated, mouths. ##are open,. tongues are shaped like daggers. #Picasso chose to paint Guernica in a stark monochromatic. ##palet. te of gray, black and white. #This may reflect his initial encounter with the original newspap. ##er. reports and photographs in black and white; or perhaps it suggested to Picasso the objective fact.. ##uality of an eye witness report. #A documentary quality is further emphasized by the textured patt. er. ##n in the center of the painting that creates the illusion of newsprint. #The sharp alternation. of bl. ##ack and white contrasts across the painting surface also creates dramatic intensity, a vis. ual kineti. ##c energy of jagged movement. #Visual complexity

On first glance, Guernica’s compositi. on appears con. ##fusing and chaotic; the viewer is thrown into the midst of intensely violent actio. n. #Everything see. ##ms to be in flux. #The space is compressed and ambiguous with the shifting per. spectives and multiple. ##viewpoints characteristic of Picasso’s earlier Cubist style. #Images overl. ap and intersect, obscuri. ##ng forms and making it hard to distinguish their boundaries. #Bodies ar. e distorted and semi-abstract. ##ed, the forms discontinuous and fragmentary. #Everything seems jumb. led together, while sharp angular. ##lines seem to pierce and splinter the dismembered bodies. #Howe. ver, there is in fact an overriding. ##visual order. #Picasso balances the composition by organizing. the figures into three vertical groupi. ##ngs moving left to right, while the center figures are st. abilized within a large triangle of light.. ##In the panel on which I am working, which I call Guer. nica, I clearly express my abhorrence of the m. ##ilitary caste which has sunk Spain into an ocean o. f pain and death. #Symbolism

There has been almos. ##t endless debate about the meaning of the imag. es in Guernica. #Questioned about its possible symboli. ##sm, Picasso said it was simply an appeal t. o people about massacred people and animals. #The horse an. ##d bull are images Picasso used his ent. ire career, part of the life and death ritual of the Spanish b. ##ullfights he first saw as a child.. #Some scholars interpret the horse and bull as representing the d. ##eadly battle between the Repub. lican fighters (horse) and Franco’s fascist army (bull). #Picasso said. ##only that the bull represe. nted brutality and darkness, adding “It isn’t up to the painter to define. ##the symbols. #Otherwise. it would be better if he wrote them out in so many words. #The public who l. ##ook at the picture m. ust interpret the symbols as they understand them. #”

In the end, the painting. ##does not appear t. o have one exclusive meaning. #Perhaps it is that very ambiguity, the lack of histo. ##rical specifi. city, or the fact that brutal wars continue to be fought, that keeps Guernica as timele. ##ss and un. iversally relatable today as it was in 1937. #Source

#source
https://smarthistory.org/pica. ##sso-g. uernica/..
