##Picasso's training under his father began before 1890. #His progress can be traced in the collect. io. ##n of early works now held by the Museu Picasso in Barcelona, which provides one of the most co. mprehe. ##nsive records extant of any major artist's beginnings. #[23] During 1893 the juvenile qual. ity of his. ##earliest work falls away, and by 1894 his career as a painter can be said to have begu. n. #[24] The. ##academic realism apparent in the works of the mid-1890s is well displayed in The Fir. st Communion (18. ##96), a large composition that depicts his sister, Lola. #In the same year, at th. e age of 14, he pain. ##ted Portrait of Aunt Pepa, a vigorous and dramatic portrait that Juan-Eduard. o Cirlot has called "wit. ##hout a doubt one of the greatest in the whole history of Spanish paintin. g. #"[25]

In 1897, his real. ##ism began to show a Symbolist influence, for example, in a series of. landscape paintings rendered in. ##non-naturalistic violet and green tones. #What some call his Mod. ernist period (1899–1900) followed.. ##His exposure to the work of Rossetti, Steinlen, Toulouse-Lau. trec and Edvard Munch, combined with h. ##is admiration for favourite old masters such as El Greco,. led Picasso to a personal version of moder. ##nism in his works of this period. #[26]

Picasso made. his first trip to Paris, then the art capital. ##of Europe, in 1900. #There, he met his first Parisi. an friend, journalist and poet Max Jacob, who hel. ##ped Picasso learn the language and its literatu. re. #Soon they shared an apartment; Max slept at nigh. ##t while Picasso slept during the day and wo. rked at night. #These were times of severe poverty, cold,. ##and desperation. #Much of his work was. burned to keep the small room warm. #During the first five m. ##onths of 1901, Picasso lived in Madr. id, where he and his anarchist friend Francisco de Asís Soler fo. ##unded the magazine Arte Joven (Y. oung Art), which published five issues. #Soler solicited articles an. ##d Picasso illustrated the jo. urnal, mostly contributing grim cartoons depicting and sympathizing with. ##the state of the poor. #. The first issue was published on 31 March 1901, by which time the artist ha. ##d started to sign his. work Picasso. #[27] From 1898 he signed his works as "Pablo Ruiz Picasso", the. ##n as "Pablo R. #P. icasso" until 1901. #The change does not seem to imply a rejection of the father fi. ##gure. #Rather. , he wanted to distinguish himself from others; initiated by his Catalan friends who ha. ##bitually. called him by his maternal surname, much less current than the paternal Ruiz. #[28]...
