##Picasso with his sister Lola, 1889
Picasso was born at 23:15 on 25 October 1881, in the city of M. ál. ##aga, Andalusia, in southern Spain. #[2] He was the first child of Don José Ruiz y Blasco (1838. –1913). ##and María Picasso y López. #[14] Picasso's family was of middle-class background. #His fat. her was a. ##painter who specialized in naturalistic depictions of birds and other game. #For most o. f his life,. ##Ruiz was a professor of art at the School of Crafts and a curator of a local museum.. #[1] Ruiz's anc. ##estors were minor aristocrats. #Picasso's birth certificate and the record of his. baptism include ve. ##ry long names, combining those of various saints and relatives. #[a][c] Ruiz. y Picasso were his pate. ##rnal and maternal surnames, respectively, per Spanish custom. #The surnam. e "Picasso" comes from Ligu. ##ria, a coastal region of north-western Italy. #[16] Pablo's maternal. great-grandfather, Tommaso Pica. ##sso, moved to Spain around 1807. #[16]

Picasso showed a passion. and a skill for drawing from an ear. ##ly age. #According to his mother, his first words were "piz,. piz", a shortening of lápiz, the Spanis. ##h word for "pencil". #[17] From the age of seven, Picasso. received formal artistic training from his. ##father in figure drawing and oil painting. #Ruiz was. a traditional academic artist and instructor,. ##who believed that proper training required discipli. ned copying of the masters, and drawing the human. ##body from plaster casts and live models. #His s. on became preoccupied with art to the detriment of h. ##is classwork. #The family moved to A Coruña. in 1891, where his father became a professor at the Scho. ##ol of Fine Arts. #They stayed almost fou. r years. #On one occasion, the father found his son painting. ##over his unfinished sketch of a pige. on. #Observing the precision of his son's technique, an apocryp. ##hal story relates, Ruiz felt that. the thirteen-year-old Picasso had surpassed him, and vowed to give. ##up painting,[18] though paint. ings by him exist from later years. #In 1895, Picasso was traumatized. ##when his seven-year-old sis. ter, Conchita, died of diphtheria. #[19] After her death, the family move. ##d to Barcelona, where R. uiz took a position at its School of Fine Arts. #Picasso thrived in the city,. ##regarding it in tim. es of sadness or nostalgia as his true home. #[20] Ruiz persuaded the officials. ##at the academy to. allow his son to take an entrance exam for the advanced class. #This process often. ##took students. a month, but Picasso completed it in a week, and the jury admitted him, at just 13. #. ##As a stude. nt, Picasso lacked discipline but made friendships that would affect him in later life. #H. ##is fat. her rented a small room for him close to home so he could work alone, yet he checked up on him. ##nu. merous times a day, judging his drawings. #The two argued frequently. #[21]

Picasso's father and. #. #uncle decided to send the young artist to Madrid's Real Academia de Bellas Artes de San Fernando, t. . ##he country's foremost art school. #[20] At age 16, Picasso set off for the first time on his own. , bu. ##t he disliked formal instruction and stopped attending classes soon after enrollment. #Madri. d held m. ##any other attractions. #The Prado housed paintings by Diego Velázquez, Francisco Goya, a. nd Francisco. ##Zurbarán. #Picasso especially admired the works of El Greco; elements such as his el. ongated limbs,. ##arresting colours, and mystical visages are echoed in Picasso's later work. #[22].. ..
