###Pablo Ruiz Picasso[a][b] (25 October 1881 – 8 April 1973) was a Spanish painter, sculptor, printm. ak. ##er, ceramicist and theatre designer who spent most of his adult life in France. #One of the mo. st inf. ##luential artists of the 20th century, he is known for co-founding the Cubist movement, the. invention. ##of constructed sculpture,[8][9] the co-invention of collage, and for the wide variety. of styles tha. ##t he helped develop and explore. #Among his most famous works are the proto-Cubist. Les Demoiselles d. ##'Avignon (1907), and the anti-war painting Guernica (1937), a dramatic portraya. l of the bombing of G. ##uernica by German and Italian air forces during the Spanish Civil War. #Pic. asso demonstrated extraor. ##dinary artistic talent in his early years, painting in a naturalistic m. anner through his childhood a. ##nd adolescence. #During the first decade of the 20th century, his s. tyle changed as he experimented w. ##ith different theories, techniques, and ideas. #After 1906, the. Fauvist work of the older artist Hen. ##ri Matisse motivated Picasso to explore more radical styles. , beginning a fruitful rivalry between th. ##e two artists, who subsequently were often paired by cr. itics as the leaders of modern art. #[10][11]. ##[12][13]

Picasso's work is often categorized into. periods. #While the names of many of his later pe. ##riods are debated, the most commonly accepted p. eriods in his work are the Blue Period (1901–1904), t. ##he Rose Period (1904–1906), the African-inf. luenced Period (1907–1909), Analytic Cubism (1909–1912),. ##and Synthetic Cubism (1912–1919), also r. eferred to as the Crystal period. #Much of Picasso's work of. ##the late 1910s and early 1920s is in. a neoclassical style, and his work in the mid-1920s often has. ##characteristics of Surrealism. #Hi. s later work often combines elements of his earlier styles. #Excep. ##tionally prolific throughout t. he course of his long life, Picasso achieved universal renown and imme. ##nse fortune for his revolu. tionary artistic accomplishments, and became one of the best-known figures. ##in 20th-century art...