##Introduction

Created as an anti-war protest piece in response to the 1937 aerial bombing of a sm. al. ##l town in northern Spain, Guernica quickly became one of Pablo Picasso’s most-recognized Cubis. t pain. ##tings—and for very good reason. #Its monochromatic color palette, intense contrast, and la. rge, viole. ##nt images are visceral, compelling, and unforgettable even today. #for those who saw i. t in 1937, wit. ##h international tensions running high and World War II looming on the horizon, Gue. rnica struck home. ##like a bolt of lightning. #At the time, Picasso was in his mid-50s and living i. n France rather than. ##Spain, the land of his birth. #As his fame grew, Picasso explored a variety. of artistic styles, draw. ##ing often from Cubism (which he created with Georges Braque) and the Sur. realist movement epitomized. ##by Salvador Dali and his famous “melting clocks” painting. #The geniu. s of Guernica is that it succes. ##sfully combines dreamlike (some might say nightmarish) elements o. f Surrealism with the multiple pers. ##pectives of Cubism. #It was a shocking painting, both for its. modern, Cubist style and for its haunt. ##ing subject matter. #After being displayed at the 1937 Wo. rld’s Fair in Paris, Guernica went on a two. ##-year “world tour” to encourage anti-fascist sentimen. t and raise funds for the troops of the Spanish. ##Republic. #When World War II began in 1939, Guern. ica left Europe and was sent to New York’s Museum. ##of Modern Art for safekeeping. #MoMA continued. to display the massive painting in various US cities. ##and around the world for almost two decades—. helping to turn Picasso and Cubism into household names.. ##It’s hard to say whether the bombing of. Guernica would have gained such international attention wi. ##thout Picasso’s painting drawing atte. ntion to it. #Certainly, the bombing was an atrocious act of vi. ##olence—Guernica was a civilian to. wn, deliberately targeted by the Nazi Luftwaffe on behalf of their. ##ally, General Francisco Franco. , who was leading the rebellion against the Spanish Republic. #Yet thi. ##s type of warfare soon bec. ame commonplace—proving that, in its own way, Guernica was nothing short o. ##f prophetic: a paintin. g that perfectly encapsulates the inhumanity and horror of modern war, and sta. ##nds as a timeless. warning of what mankind is capable of. #A quick overview of Cubism

To really unde. ##rstand Guernic. a, it’s important to understand how Cubism differs from other art movements. #While cl. ##assical an. d neoclassical artists try to replicate the world exactly as it appears in real life (or s. ##ome pe. rfected version of it), Cubists like Picasso were open to depicting the world in more abstract. ##wa. ys that offered new, impossible visions of reality. #At its core, Cubism is a method of painting. ##. a person, scene, or object from multiple angles. #Picasso and Georges Braque developed this techniqu. . ##e and used it to simplify and distill any three-dimensional subject into a multi-faceted, “cubis. t” s. ##hape. #Picasso was also greatly influenced by the carved, angular shapes of African masks, a. n inspir. ##ation that can be seen in many of his paintings. #These kinds of Cubist artworks—called. Analytic Cub. ##ism, to differentiate it from a different, collage-style artwork known as Synthetic. Cubism—are typic. ##ally broken up into geometric segments, occasionally separated by angular lines. to form divisions be. ##tween the various perspectives being shown. #While less “geometric” than som. e of Picasso’s earlier C. ##ubist pieces, Guernica’s flattened, shifting perspectives and simplified. color palette are clear ear. ##marks of the Cubist style. #Ultimately, Picasso—and Guernica—were bo. th incredibly influential in shi. ##fting the art world toward modernism and what we now call “abstr. act art. #”

Analysis of Guernica

G. ##uernica’s primary visual impact comes from its collection of. maimed and dying figures, rendered in s. ##tark black, white, and gray on a huge canvas. #We alread. y know about the event that led Picasso to c. ##reate this painting (the bombing of Guernica) but he. mixed in a lot of symbolism as well, conveying. ##deeper meaning for both himself and the Spanish p. eople. #For our in-depth analysis of Guernica, let’. ##s break the painting down into three parts: c. olor and style, symbols, and human figures. #Color and. ##style

Picasso didn’t want to distract fro. m his message by including color, so he eventually made it. ##all stark white, black, and gray. #Ori. ginally, he’d painted a red tear on the woman’s face but ulti. ##mately decided not to keep it. #It. makes sense why he did that. #with no color, there’s no relief fr. ##om what you’re seeing, and ther. e’s also no unintended (or intended) focal point that way either. #Wh. ##en viewed in person, the en. tire mural-sized painting hits you all at once, with too many visuals to. ##process. #The closer you. get to it, the more it engulfs you in the monstrosities of war. #The center. ##of the painting espe. cially is a jumble of angular shapes, cutting across each other with violent en. ##ergy. #Guernica’s. composition is that of a central triangle of conflict, flanked on the left and rig. ##ht sides by m. ore personal horrors. #The detail above shows a mother weeping for her dead child on th. ##e left. #. On the right, a figure is engulfed in the flames of a burning building (even more chilling. ##for it. s dispassionate white and black hues). #Guernica detail - a burning figure reaching towards th. ##e. sky amidst bombed out buildingsI find the buildings themselves to be absolutely fascinating too—yo.. ##u might miss them at first glance since they fade into the background behind the screaming figures. b. ##ut the longer you look at Guernica, the more of the stage you’ll see. #In one spot, a peaked r. oof is. ##turned on its side. #There a building burns. #And all around, empty doorways and windows g. ape like. ##missing teeth and empty eye socket in the burned-out skull of a city. #While the figures. and symbols. ##are a commentary on war in general, and the setting of this painting perfectly repre. sents the town. ##of Guernica, blasted into rubble by the bombs of the Luftwaffe. #Symbols

Placed c. entrally in the pa. ##inting, Picasso painted a rearing horse with rolling eyes and distended teeth—. its face is so anguish. ##ed, you can almost hear it scream and you even might miss the spear pierci. ng it from back to front.. ###On the left, a bull seems to guard the mother and child, or perhaps lo. oms over them like the shadow. ##of the war, while in the distant background, barely visible, a bird. shrieks at the sky. #Guernica d. ##etail - electric bulb and oil lamp over horseWhile the bull may. indeed symbolize war (or perhaps bul. ##lfighting, referencing both Spain in particular and the huma. n desire for dominance in general) I bel. ##ieve the suffering horse is a metaphor for the undeserve. d death that war often brings to the innocen. ##t. #Even more telling is the electric bulb casting a. harsh light from above, in sharp contrast to th. ##e hand-held oil lamp. #Picasso placed those two. elements right next to each other for a reason:

In. ##a nutshell, he’s showing the harsh reality of. progress—for all the good that it brings (electricity,. ##automobiles. #planes) it also brings deat. h and destruction. #The human element

Like the dying hors. ##e, the death of the child in its mothe. r’s arms symbolizes the suffering of the innocent. #And everyw. ##here else in this painting we simp. ly see the atrocities of war. #Limbs are huge, swollen, and wounde. ##d. #Mouths gape in soundless s. creams, eyes are wide in terror, brows are furrowed in anguish. #A sin. ##gle warrior lies broken an. d dismembered at the base of the painting, trampled by the death throes of. ##the horse above him. #. His arm clutches a broken sword, separated from his body. #In Guernica we fin. ##d no solace in huma. nity—all is death and destruction. #Picasso painted Guernica over the course of j. ##ust 35 days, a. stunning achievement for such a large work, especially one that has made such a mark. ##in history.. #Picasso’s painting techniques & materials

While Picasso is best known for his modern,. ##abstract. paintings, he still learned to draw and paint realistically at a very young age. #His own s. ##tyle. of painting only began to emerge when he was 19 and living in Paris. #It began with his “Blue P. ##e. riod” (quickly followed by his “Rose Period”) which was named because of the predominantly blue and.. ##pink hues used throughout his paintings at that time. #As Picasso began to experiment more with C. ub. ##ism, he switched to a limited range of oil paints in muted earth tones. #Today’s version of Pi. casso’. ##s Cubist color palette would include colors like Burnt Umber and Burnt Sienna, Yellow Ochr. e, Titaniu. ##m White, French Ultramarine Blue, and Ivory Black. #The artist himself was said to use. the Sennelier. ##brand of paints (which had a stiff texture prized by the Impressionists for its ab. ility to make thi. ##ck daubs on the canvas) and was readily available in Paris at the end of the 19. th century. #Picasso. ##was also known for finding less “artistic” paints (like those used in indust. rial applications) and a. ##dding them to his palette as well. #Other non-art objects were pressed i. nto service too: in Guernica. ##, for example, he added pieces of wallpaper for texture, and at othe. r times he mixed sand into his p. ##aint or bits of newspaper. #A typical Cubist painting by Picasso. might start out with a Burnt Sienna. ##background and a simple painted outline of his subject. #By. moving around his subject as he painted. ##, Picasso was able to layer multiple angles and perspecti. ves into a single image. #Picasso famously. ##referenced his constantly-changing style of painting b. y saying, “It took me four years to paint like. ##Raphael, but a lifetime to paint like a child. #”. How much is Guernica worth today. #Guernica has. ##never been sold at auction, so its value is hard. to determine—given its historical ties to Spain, an. ##d the worldwide fame of Picasso, it’s unlike. ly that Guernica will ever be sold. #That said, several. ##other paintings by Picasso have sold in r. ecent decades for well over 100 million dollars, so it’s ea. ##sy enough to hypothesize Guernica’s v. alue. #Given the large size of Guernica (compared to Picasso’s. ##other paintings) as well as its hi. storical and cultural significance, its value would probably excee. ##d 200 million dollars if it we. nt up for auction. #Ownership controversy

Picasso intended for the pa. ##inting to be a gift to the. people of Spain, but its ownership has at times been the subject of disag. ##reement. #The main rea. son for this is that in 1937 the Spanish Republic gave Picasso 150,000 French. ##francs to help pay. for some of his expenses in creating Guernica (roughly $7,500 or in today’s dolla. ##rs, $135,000).. #It’s unclear whether Picasso considered Guernica “sold” to the Spanish government, a. ##lthough sou. rces close to the artist say he did NOT consider it a sale. #The Spanish government, on t. ##he othe. r hand, says that they either acquired it or commissioned it in 1937. #Whoever the owner was. ##at t. he time, Picasso himself chose to display Guernica at the World’s Fair in Paris in 1937, as well. ##. as various exhibits around the world before entrusting it to the Museum of Modern Art from 1939 unt.. ##il 1981 (he asked that MoMA keep the painting until Spain was a stable democracy). #Accordingly,. in. ##1981 Guernica returned to Spain through an agreement with Picasso’s heirs, MoMA, and the Spani. sh gov. ##ernment. #Where is Guernica located. #If you’re in Spain, you can see Guernica in person a. t the Muse. ##o Reina Sofia in Madrid. #Guernica takes up an entire wall in room 205. #10, on the 2n. d floor of the. ##Sabatini Building. #Admission to the museum costs 12 € and is open on weekdays (ex. cept Tuesdays) fr. ##om 10am to 9pm. #The museum also offers reduced hours on Sundays and holidays.. #You can also get fre. ##e admission to Museo Reina Sofia from 7-9pm on weekdays (except Tuesdays) a. nd on Sundays from 12:30. ##to 2:30pm. #Source

https://emptyeasel.com/guernica-famous-cubist-painti. ng-by-pablo-picasso/..
