##Guernica: Testimony of War

It is modern art's most powerful antiwar statement. #created by the t. we. ##ntieth century's most well-known and least understood artist. #But the mural called Guernica i. s not. ##at all what Pablo Picasso has in mind when he agrees to paint the centerpiece for the Spani. sh Pavili. ##on of the 1937 World's Fair. #Pablo Picasso
For three months, Picasso has been searchin. g for inspira. ##tion for the mural, but the artist is in a sullen mood, frustrated by a decade of t. urmoil in his per. ##sonal life and dissatisfaction with his work. #The politics of his native homel. and are also troublin. ##g him, as a brutal civil war ravages Spain. #Republican forces, loyal to th. e newly elected governmen. ##t, are under attack from a fascist coup led by Generalissimo Francisco. Franco. #Franco promises pros. ##perity and stability to the people of Spain. #Yet he delivers only. death and destruction. #more abou. ##t the Spanish Civil War
Hoping for a bold visual protest to Fra. nco's treachery from Spain's most emi. ##nent artist, colleagues and representatives of the democrat. ic government have come to Picasso's home. ##in Paris to ask him to paint the mural. #Though his sym. pathies clearly lie with the new Republic, P. ##icasso generally avoids politics - and disdains over. tly political art. #more about Picasso's commitm. ##ent to the cause
The official theme of the Paris. Exposition is a celebration of modern technology. #. ##Organizers hope this vision of a bright futu. re will jolt the nations out of the economic depression. ##and social unrest of the thirties. #Aeron. autics Pavilion at 1937 World's Fair
As plans unfold, much. ##excitement is generated by the Aeronau. tics Pavilion, featuring the latest advances in aircraft desig. ##n and engineering. #Who would susp. ect that this dramatic progress would bring about such dire conseq. ##uences. #On April 27th, 1937,. unprecedented atrocities are perpetrated on behalf of Franco against t. ##he civilian population of. a little Basque village in northern Spain. #Chosen for bombing practice by. ##Hitler's burgeoning wa. r machine, the hamlet is pounded with high-explosive and incendiary bombs for. ##over three hours. #. Townspeople are cut down as they run from the crumbling buildings. #Guernica bur. ##ns for three day. s. #Sixteen hundred civilians are killed or wounded. #more about the bombing of Guer. ##nica
By May. 1st, news of the massacre at Guernica reaches Paris, where more than a million protester. ##s flood. the streets to voice their outrage in the largest May Day demonstration the city has ever se. ##en.. #Eyewitness reports fill the front pages of Paris papers. #Picasso is stunned by the stark black. ##. and white photographs. #Appalled and enraged, Picasso rushes through the crowded streets to his stu.. ##dio, where he quickly sketches the first images for the mural he will call Guernica. #His search. for. ##inspiration is over. #Picasso sketch - horse and woman with dead child
From the beginning, Pi. casso. ##chooses not to represent the horror of Guernica in realist or romantic terms. #Key figures. - a woman. ##with outstretched arms, a bull, an agonized horse - are refined in sketch after sketch,. then transf. ##erred to the capacious canvas, which he also reworks several times. #"A painting is. not thought out. ##and settled in advance," said Picasso. #"While it is being done, it changes as on. e's thoughts change. ##. #And when it's finished, it goes on changing, according to the state of min. d of whoever is looking. ##at it. #"
more about Picasso's artistic process
Three months later, Guern. ica is delivered to the Sp. ##anish Pavilion, where the Paris Exposition is already in progress. #Lo. cated out of the way, and grou. ##ped with the pavilions of smaller countries some distance from the. Eiffel Tower, the Spanish Pavilio. ##n stood in the shadow of Albert Speer's monolith to Nazi Germa. ny. #The Spanish Pavilion's main attra. ##ction, Picasso's Guernica, is a sober reminder of the trag. ic events in Spain. #more about the Spanis. ##h Civil War
Initial reaction to the painting is overwh. elmingly critical. #The German fair guide call. ##s Guernica "a hodgepodge of body parts that any fo. ur-year-old could have painted. #" It dismisses th. ##e mural as the dream of a madman. #Even the So. viets, who had sided with the Spanish government again. ##st Franco, react coolly. #They favor more. overt imagery, believing that only more realistic art can. ##have political or social consequence. #. Yet Picasso's tour de force would become one of this century'. ##s most unsettling indictments of wa. r. #more about the tension between art and politics
After the Fai. ##r, Guernica tours Europe and No. rthern America to raise consciousness about the threat of fascism. #F. ##rom the beginning of World. War II until 1981, Guernica is housed in its temporary home at the Museum. ##of Modern Art in New Yo. rk, though it makes frequent trips abroad to such places as Munich, Cologne,. ##Stockholm, and even. Sao Palo in Brazil. #The one place it does not go is Spain. #Although Picasso h. ##ad always intende. d for the mural to be owned by the Spanish people, he refuses to allow it to travel. ##to Spain unti. l the country enjoys "public liberties and democratic institutions. #"
more about Guer. ##nica in ex. ile
Speculations as to the exact meaning of the jumble of tortured images are as numerous. ##and var. ied as the people who have viewed the painting. #There is no doubt that Guernica challenges o. ##ur. notions of warfare as heroic and exposes it as a brutal act of self-destruction. #But it is a hal. #. #lmark of Picasso's art that any symbol can hold many, often contradictory meanings, and the precise. . ##significance of the imagery in Guernica remains ambiguous. #When asked to explain his symbolism,. Pic. ##asso remarked, "It isn't up to the painter to define the symbols. #Otherwise it would be bet. ter if h. ##e wrote them out in so many words. #The public who look at the picture must interpret th. e symbols as. ##they understand them. #"
more about questions of meaning
In 1973, Pablo Picasso, the. most influenti. ##al artist of the twentieth century, dies at the age of ninety-two. #And when Fran. co dies in 1975, Sp. ##ain moves closer to its dream of democracy. #On the centenary of Picasso's bi. rth, October 25th, 1981. ##, Spain's new Republic carries out the best commemoration possible: the r. eturn of Guernica to Picass. ##o's native soil in a testimony of national reconciliation. #In its fi. nal journey, Picasso's apocalyp. ##tic vision has served as a banner for a nation on its path toward. freedom and democracy. #Now showca. ##sed at the Reina Sofía, Spain's national museum of modern art. , Guernica is acclaimed as an artistic. ##masterpiece, taking its rightful place among the great Spa. nish treasures of El Greco, Goya and Velaz. ##quez. #"A lot of people recognize the painting," says. art historian Patricia Failing. #"They may not. ##even know that it's a Picasso, but they recognize. the image. #It's a kind of icon. #"

Picasso's co. ##mmitment to the cause

Until the Spanish Civil. War broke out in 1936, Picasso had never shown any re. ##al interest in politics. #But as was the ca. se for many artists and intellectuals in Europe at the ti. ##me, the threat of fascism fueled in Pic. asso a passionate opposition to the precepts and atrocities o. ##f war. #His activism took the form. of financial and personal support for the Republican cause, but h. ##e was reluctant to mix politics. and art. #In November of 1936, Franco launched an all-out air attack. ##on Madrid. #When the Museum. del Prado itself was bombarded by Franco's artillery, the museum's enti. ##re collection had to be. removed from the city for safety. #Infuriated by the wanton destruction, he. ##accepted the role of. Honorary Director-in-Exile of the Prado and became a spokesman of the Republica. ##n government in i. ts efforts to publicize Franco's desecration of Spain's artistic heritage. #Picasso. ##also made his. condemnation of Franco and the Spanish situation known in a series of bitterly satiri. ##cal illust. rations accompanied by his own prose poem, The Dream and Lie of Franco. #The eighteen pane. ##ls of. caricature-like etchings were designed as postcards to be sold at the Spanish Pavilion of the. ##193. 7 World Fair to raise money for the Republican cause. #"This is a time in Picasso's life and care. #. #er when he is not only involved in a broader way with political events," says art historian, Patric. i. ##a Failing, "but also does something very unusual, which is to produce a work specifically for p. ropag. ##andistic and fundraising purposes. #"

a selection from The Dream and Lie of Franco

Franco. had port. ##rayed himself to the Spanish people as a champion of traditional Spanish culture. #But. in Dream and. ##Lie Picasso exposes this claim as a grotesque deceit. #"And throughout the whole ser. ies, Picasso man. ##ages this evil little character of a polyp in a very theatrical way," adds Faili. ng, "like a characte. ##r on a stage that he outfits with various hats and props, and thereby sugges. ts relationships with th. ##e Catholic clergy, with art historical traditions, with the traditions o. f Spanish royalty - basicall. ##y relationships with the elements of Spanish culture that General Fr. anco was claiming in his campaig. ##n to win the hearts of the Spanish people. #"

Picasso's etching. s show Franco as a monstrosity masqu. ##erading as tradition, an enemy of the arts, an oppressor of. workers and peasants and of creative ene. ##rgy and freedom, and a murderer of Spanish women and chi. ldren. #Although many of the images Picasso. ##used in Dream and Lie are reminiscent of his earlier. works, the distorted figures portraying Franco. ##as an "evil-omened polyp" were clearly meant to re. present the evil faces of the fascist dictator. #". ##There's an element of caricature, an element o. f obviousness. #There's an element of burlesque in The. ##Dream and Lie of Franco etchings that you. don't find in his other work, and you certainly don't fin. ##d any kind of direct parallel in the Gu. ernica painting. #"

The last four drawings of the series mos. ##t closely express what the language. of his poetry describes:. #cries of children cries of women crie. ##s of birds cries of flowers cri. es of timbers and of stones cries of bricks cries of furniture of bed. ##s of chains of curtains of. pots and of papers cries of odors which claw at one another cries of smok. ##e pricking the shoulder. of cries. #Bombing of Guernica

town of Guernica
It was market day in Guerni. ##ca when the church. bells of Santa Maria sounded the alarm that afternoon in 1937. #People from the s. ##urrounding hill. sides crowded the town square. #"Every Monday was a fair in Guernica," says José Mona. ##sterio, eye. witness to the bombing. #"They attacked when there were a lot of people there. #And they. ##knew whe. n their bombing would kill the most. #When there are more people, more people would die. #". ##survi. vor Jose Monasterio
For over three hours, twenty-five or more of Germany's best-equipped bombe. ##rs. , accompanied by at least twenty more Messerschmitt and Fiat Fighters, dumped one hundred thousand.. ##pounds of high-explosive and incendiary bombs on the village, slowly and systematically pounding i. t. ##to rubble. #"We were hiding in the shelters and praying. #I only thought of running away, I was. so. ##scared. #I didn't think about my parents, mother, house, nothing. #Just escape. #Because duri. ng thos. ##e three and one half hours, I thought I was going to die. #" (eyewitness Luis Aurtenetxea. )

victim o. ##f Spanish Civil War
Those trying to escape were cut down by the strafing machine guns. of fighter pla. ##nes. #"They kept just going back and forth, sometimes in a long line, sometimes i. n close formation.. ##It was as if they were practicing new moves. #They must have fired thousands. of bullets. #" (eyewit. ##ness Juan Guezureya) The fires that engulfed the city burned for three day. s. #Seventy percent of the. ##town was destroyed. #Sixteen hundred civilians - one third of the popu. lation - were killed or wound. ##ed. #News of the bombing spread like wildfire. #The Nationalists im. mediately denied any involvement,. ##as did the Germans. #But few were fooled by Franco's protestati. ons of innocence. #In the face of in. ##ternational outrage at the carnage, Von Richthofen claimed p. ublicly that the target was a bridge ove. ##r the Mundaca River on the edge of town, chosen in order. to cut off the fleeing Republican troops. #. ##But although the Condor Legion was made up of the be. st airmen and planes of Hitler's developing war. ##machine, not a single hit was scored on the presu. med target, nor on the railway station, nor on the. ##small-arms factory nearby. #Guernica after the. bombing in 1937
Guernica is the cultural capital of t. ##he Basque people, seat of their centuries-. old independence and democratic ideals. #It has no strateg. ##ic value as a military target. #Yet so. me time later, a secret report to Berlin was uncovered in whic. ##h Von Richthofen stated, ". #the c. oncentrated attack on Guernica was the greatest success," making t. ##he dubious intent of the missi. on clear: the all-out air attack had been ordered on Franco's behalf t. ##o break the spirited Basqu. e resistance to Nationalist forces. #Guernica had served as the testing gr. ##ound for a new Nazi mi. litary tactic - blanket-bombing a civilian population to demoralize the enemy.. ##It was wanton, ma. n-made holocaust. #Note: On May 12, 1999, the New York Times reported that, after. ##sixty-one years. , in a declaration adopted on April 24, 1999, the German Parliament formally apologi. ##zed to the c. itizens of Guernica for the role the Condor Legion played in bombing the town. #The Germ. ##an gover. nment also agreed to change the names of some German military barracks named after members o. ##f th. e Condor Legion. #By contrast, no formal apology to the city has ever been offered by the Spanis. ##. h government for whatever role it may have played in the bombing. #Spanish War

The circumstances th. . ##at led to the Spanish Civil War had been developing for years. #In 1923, a coup d'etat had estab. lish. ##ed General Miguel Primo de Rivera as virtual dictator of Spain, though King Alfonzo XIII rem. ained th. ##e royal figurehead. #But by 1930, growing opposition to de Rivera's right-wing governmen. t led to his. ##resignation. #The following year, popular elections threw out the monarchist governm. ent and forced. ##the abdication of King Alfonso XIII. #The Second Republic, as the new Spain was ca. lled, suffered muc. ##h political turmoil, while factions fought over how much reform should be unde. rtaken and at what pac. ##e. #A coalition of leftist parties joined together to dominate the parliam. ent, calling for sweeping. ##social reforms. #But competing conservative factions in Spain continual. ly threatened the loose union. ##, and over the next several years the political situation became in. creasingly polarized. #By the ele. ##ction of 1936, the Popular Front party had united members of th. e left and won the election. #But fiv. ##e months later, on July 18, a rebellion broke out among arm. y units, marking the beginning of the Spa. ##nish Civil War. #The right-wing generals, led by Genera. l Francisco Franco, launched a military coup. ##to overthrow the elected parliament. #As the civil w. ar dragged on, Hitler and Mussolini made a pact. ##with Franco. #In return for large quantities of i. ron ore, copper and other raw materials - resources. ##for their growing war machine - they would le. nd Franco the support necessary to take and hold the B. ##asque port of Bilbao, a strategic gateway. to the shipbuilding and heavy industry facilities of the n. ##orth. #With their support, Franco took. control of more and more Spanish territory. #Republican force. ##s mounted heroic opposition, but t. heir supplies were limited, their weapons outdated and their inter. ##national support was faltering. . #In an effort to contain the civil war, France, England and the Unit. ##ed States had signed a con. troversial Non-Intervention Pact, which denied assistance to the Republic.. ##In spite of unlimited. resources from his fascist allies, Franco was unable to break the spirited r. ##esistance in the mo. untainous Basque region of northern Spain. #He turned again to Hitler for the loa. ##n of the Fuhrer. 's latest bombers and fighters. #This force would be known as the "Condor Legion. #". ##Airplanes ha. d been in their infancy when first used in World War I. #The fragile cloth-covered bipl. ##anes play. ed only a marginal role in reconnaissance, occasional dogfights, or harassment of enemy inf. ##antry. with light machine-gun fire and hand grenades. #But the 1920's and 30's saw great advances in. ##ae. ronautics, and along with improved technologies came disturbing new military strategies. #In 1935,.. ##German General Erich Ludendorff published Die Totale Krieg (The Total War) in which he presented t. h. ##e view that in war, no one is innocent; everyone is a combatant and everyone a target, soldier. and c. ##ivilian alike. #Italian General Giulio Douhet further suggested an enemy's morale could be. crushed b. ##y air-delivered terror. #Such theories intrigued Nazi Germany's new Fuhrer, but they ne. eded testing.. ##Spain seemed to be the perfect laboratory. #The Commander of the Condor Legion was. Lt. #Colonel Wo. ##lfram von Richthofen, cousin of Manfred von Richthofen, the infamous Red Baron o. f World War I. #It w. ##as Von Richthofen who earmarked Guernica for bombardment, on behalf of Franc. o. #At precisely 3:45 PM. ##, Monday, April 26, 1937, the first German bomber took off. #Three-quart. ers of an hour later, the fi. ##rst bomb fell on Guernica - a direct hit on the plaza at the center. of town, a full quarter mile fro. ##m the targeted bridge. #Picasso's artistic process

Picasso's sk. etch - composition 1
The first compo. ##sition for the mural — drawn the very day word of the bombin. g reached Picasso in Paris — introduced. ##characters that had recurred in the artist's previous wor. k. #Picasso shaped and reshaped these figur. ##es over the next weeks in a series of preliminary ske. tches. #He brought out the vulnerability of the. ##bull and the agony of the horse. #He drew screami. ng women and children, perhaps inspired by his fea. ##r that harm might come to his own baby daughte. r. #He seemed haunted by the many faces of anguish. #c. ##olored sketch with human hair
"Many of the. drawings are much more expressive than the final painting. ##," says art historian Tomas Llorens. #. "But that is inevitable because Guernica was conceived as a ve. ##ry public image. #And some of the. meanings and emotions that you can convey on a piece of paper cann. ##ot be conveyed in a mural that. is seven meters wide. #For instance, in one of the drawings there is. ##hair — perhaps the hair of. Dora Maar — pasted in a kind of collage. #So, you would lose that meaning. ##in a large public mural. . #But in a sense the energy, the emotional energy that comes from those exp. ##eriments, is not los. t. #Picasso was always synthesizing in each image a lot of different possibiliti. ##es. #"

On May 1. 1th, just fifteen days after the bombing, Picasso stretched a canvas for the mural.. ##It stood ele. ven-and-a-half feet tall by almost twenty-six feet wide - so large, he had to brace it. ##at a slant. to fit under the ceiling of his studio. #He then began to lay out the images in full scal. ##e - a. woman wailing over her dead child. #a warrior clutching a shattered sword as his horse drops i. ##n. torment to its knees. #a jumble of bodies lying trampled on the ground — all part of Picasso's vis.. ##ion of the holocaust at Guernica. #Consequences of War by Rubens
According to art historian, Patri. ci. ##a Failing, "Picasso was very properly trained in the grand tradition of painting, allegorical. painti. ##ng about universal themes: the horrors of war, the massacres of the innocents. #Characters. that typi. ##cally appear in these paintings reappear in Picasso's paintings as well. #There's usua. lly quite clea. ##rly a suffering woman, someone who's screaming, a woman with a child who's been in. jured, or may even. ##be dead. #And to see that Picasso was able to take that traditional academic m. otif and actually rew. ##ork it and make it relevant again to this particular time and this particul. ar circumstance, I think. ##is really one of his great achievements in this painting. #"

With Picas. so as he painted was his lat. ##est lover, Dora Maar, a young photographer who also became his colla. borator. #Dora's photographs of. ##the work in progress documented Picasso's creative process and hi. s struggle between political imager. ##y and artistic merit. #Guernica - State I
As the focal point. of the painting, Picasso initially drew. ##a boldly raised arm and clenched fist, the familiar salut. e of the Spanish Republican forces. #But t. ##he artist was dissatisfied with the obvious symbolism.. #Over the next several days, he created a mor. ##e hopeful message of victory, the raised fist clut. ching stalks of grain in front of a blazing sun. #. ##Still, Picasso's artistic sensibility was in c. onflict with the political sentiment of the canvas. #". ##The stand of Picasso was quite clear," say. s Llorens. #"A work of art, in order to be really effectiv. ##e in political terms, has to work firs. t of all as a work of art. #"

Pablo Picasso painting
A week l. ##ater, the arm was completely paint. ed over. #But the center of the painting had lost its focus. #To s. ##olve the problem, Picasso move. d the body of the bull near to the woman and child, lifting the head o. ##f the horse to a place of. prominence and making the spear more obvious. #No longer was the battle be. ##tween the horse and bu. ll of the ring. #Clearly, the mortal wound was caused by an act of man. #Picas. ##so's inventiveness. took him in many directions. #He added color, pattern and texture with scraps of. ##wallpaper; he g. ave the weeping woman a blood-red tear. #Later, Picasso removed all color. #Earlier i. ##n his caree. r, in his Blue Period, Picasso learned that using a monochromatic palette could produce p. ##owerful. imagery. #He suppressed color because he felt color would distract from the impact of the pa. ##int. ing. #"There was certainly a long tradition that equated line with intellect and color with emoti. #. #on," adds Failing. #"And so, to not bring in the whole element of color and its associations with e. m. ##otion and the sensual, in a way makes it a tour-de-force on another level. #"

Picasso sketch o. f han. ##d - for Guernica
Picasso then sketched possibilities for the warrior. #Not the heroic figur. e of patr. ##iotic fantasy — lifeless, broken, weapons shattered — the warrior in Guernica is no mat. ch for the en. ##gines of modern warfare. #"It's not the clenched fist with the upright arm at the e. nd that becomes s. ##uch a moving part of the picture, but the outstretched hands with the kind of f. layed fingers and the. ##deeply crossed palm," explains Failing. #lightbulb detail from Guernica
As. Guernica neared completi. ##on, Picasso added a single image of twentieth century technology. #Accor. ding to Llorens: "In Spanish. ##, an electric bulb is called 'bombia,' and 'bombia' is like the dimi. nutive of 'bomb. #' So, 'bomba-b. ##ombia' is a verbal poetic metaphor for the terrifying power of t. echnology to destroy us. #"

Shortly. ##after, although he was not at all certain the mural was comp. lete, Picasso delivered Guernica to the. ##Spanish Pavilion. #the Spanish Pavilion

    Picasso and. other avant-garde artists in the 1930's we. ##re concerned about their fate under the threat of grow. ing fascism. #José Luis Sert, who was the arch. ##itect for the Spanish Pavilion, was a major player. in gathering together Spanish intellectuals and a. ##rtists for this particular cause. #He was one. of the people who came to visit Picasso in his studio. ##and to talk to him about the possibility of. making a major contribution to this project. #Spanish Pa. ##vilion at 1937 World's Fair

"This was. a moment in which things looked pretty grim for the cause of. ##Republican Spain. #And certainly man. y Spanish intellectuals in Paris were very concerned about what. ##they could do and what kind of re. action would be appropriate. #The Spanish pavilion - which was the. ##first and only national pavili. on that Republican Spain ever had in a World Fair - drew together all. ##the resources of the great. artists and great Spanish luminaries who were in Paris. #"

"So the idea. ##of approaching Picasso t. o contribute to this project seemed like a very reasonable one, since he was. ##certainly one of the. most well known Spanish artists in Paris at that particular moment. #Exactly w. ##hat he would do a. nd what his contributions would be, of course got worked out in the process of look. ##ing at the sp. ace. #More importantly, these ideas got worked out in connection with his own feelings. ##about the. progress of the war and the suffering of the Spanish people. #And certainly when the proje. ##ct was. initiated, no one knew that Guernica would be the outcome. #"

By early June of 1937, the Par. ##is. Exposition was already in progress. #The German and Soviet pavilions towered above the fairground.. ##s, facing one another across the plaza in a monumental standoff of ideological posturing. #In thei. r. ##shadow stood the modest Spanish Pavilion. #Opening seven weeks late, it missed the wide publici. ty of. ##the Fair's grand opening and received little recognition. #It wasn't even shown on the offi. cial map. ##s. #Nazi German & Soviet Pavilions

The Pavilion had been designed primarily to affirm t. he legitimac. ##y of the Spanish Republic and to condemn the attacks of Franco's Nationalist army, w. hich now control. ##led over half the country with the support of Mussolini and Hitler. #Specificall. y, the pavilion's go. ##al was to praise the Republic's social programs, particularly those in agric. ulture and education, an. ##d to bring worldwide attention to the suffering of the Spanish people in. the civil war. #At the entr. ##ance to the pavilion, the visitor was confronted by an enormous phot. ographic mural of Republican sol. ##diers, accompanied by the slogan:

We are fighting for the essen. tial unity of Spain. #We are fightin. ##g for the integrity of Spanish soil. #We are fighting for th. e independence of our country and for
th. ##e right of the Spanish people to determine their own des. tiny. #A poem written by Paul Eluard to acco. ##mpany Guernica was displayed, along with the works o. f other well known artists sympathetic to the Re. ##publican cause, including
Guernica at Spanish Pa. vilion
Joan Miro's large canvas of an upraised arm a. ##nd clenched fist, and Alexander Calder's mer. cury fountain and mobile, painted red to symbolize the S. ##panish Republic. #Picasso's postcards of. The Dream and Lie of Franco were on sale to raise funds for. ##relief work. #Showing almost continu. ously in the auditorium were documentary films about the civil. ##war, including Madrid '36 by Luis. Buñuel and Spanish Earth by Joris Ivens and Ernest Hemingway, whic. ##h graphically depicted the suf. fering of the Spanish people. #"When you walked into the Spanish Pavil. ##ion, instead of seeing a g. lorification of the wonders of technology, you saw photographs of dead chi. ##ldren. #In the open-ai. r film pavilion you saw very dramatic films about the brutality of Franco's tr. ##oops and the suffe. ring of the people in Spain. #It was something that people really didn't want to b. ##e reminded of,. necessarily, when they came to a World Fair," adds Failing. #The main attraction, Pic. ##asso's Gue. rnica, was anything but a celebration of the marvels of technology. #Many found it repulsi. ##ve and. contrary to the spirit of the Exhibition - even those who were sympathetic to the cause. #"If. ##yo. u can't in a political painting very clearly point out the good guys and the bad guys," explains. ##. Failing, "or very clearly identify the characters in symbolic terms, this is something that's diffic. . ##ult for people who have expectations based on earlier concepts of political paintings. #"

"I pa. int. ##this way because it's a result of my thought," Picasso responded. #"I have worked for years t. o obtai. ##n this result. #I can't use an ordinary manner just to have the satisfaction of being und. erstood. #". ##One notable exception to the bad press was the prestigious French journal, Cahiers d'. Art. #Featuri. ##ng Guernica in a double issue, Picasso's creation is defended and celebrated with e. motional tributes. ##and eloquent writings from many intellectuals and artists:

Guernica sketches f. eatured in Cahiers d. ##'Art
"These visionary forms have an evocative power greater than shapes draw. n with every realistic d. ##etail. #They challenge people to truly comprehend the effects of their a. ctions. #" (Christian Zervos. ##)

"Our epoch is grand, dramatic and dangerous, and Picasso, because. he is equal to his circumstance. ##s, makes a picture worthy of them. #" Guernica is an "appalling. drama of a great people abandoned to. ##the tyrants of the Dark Ages. #All the world can see, can un. derstand, this immense Spanish tragedy.. ##" (Amedé Ozenfant)

The stark, disturbing vision, once d. ismissed as "the dream of a madman," prove. ##d prophetic when Europe was plunged into a war that en. gulfed the world. #the tension between art and. ##politics

From an interview with art historian, Pa. tricia Failing:

"One reason Guernica is consider. ##ed a treasure in terms of art history is that i. t seemed to provide a bridge between what were consid. ##ered by some to be antithetical poles: the. idea of making an effective political statement and an ef. ##fective artistic statement at the same. time. #And this is certainly one of the achievements of the G. ##uernica project, that it was a thir. d space between those two antithetical poles. #"

"A lot of artis. ##ts, who looked up to Picasso as. the exemplar of Modernist practice in painting, were interested very. ##much in being Modernists on. the one hand, and still very concerned about larger political events an. ##d the larger political a. rena in which they could act as artists. #You can find many attempts to brin. ##g these two concerns. together into the same body of work, to be really expressive and exploratory in. ##formal terms and. still be able to make a very heartfelt political statement. #And to find that the. ##great master o. f Modernism was able to accomplish this goal somehow - the mere fact that this kind of. ##resolution. might be possible - is what had such an enormous effect on artists in the twentieth cent. ##ury. #". "Guernica betrays the stereotype of the Modern as the incredibly new and the incredibly, le. ##t's. say, divorced from tradition, from academic practice. #Because it's a painting that you don't ne. #. #cessarily associate with Modernism, and yet it makes an extremely important and extremely evocative. . ##Modernist statement at the same time. #It did something that an academic painter would have love. d to. ##do, which is to take a very traditional theme and make it modern and make it relevant to a n. ew time. ##and a new audience and a new sensibility. #That's a pretty big accomplishment. #"

Guerni. ca on disp. ##lay at MOMA

"There was, of course, a great deal of argument about whether or not it w. as really as e. ##ffective a political statement as it could have been if it had been more accessibl. e, if it had been. ##more traditional. #And also whether it was really the strongest artistic statem. ent it could have bee. ##n if it weren't so tied up with a specific political agenda. #"

"When the. painting was on tour arou. ##nd the world, there was a great deal of interest on the part of Communi. st Party members and Communis. ##t intellectuals about whether or not this painting would be able to. communicate with anybody of the. ##proletarian or worker class. #And so you find that there was a l. ot of testimony collected over the y. ##ears from people of the working class who saw Guernica. #And. they responded to it very powerfully, f. ##ound that they were really just awestruck by this partic. ular painting. #It did seem to have an effec. ##t on people who you wouldn't think very likely to re. act in a positive way to this kind of elitist pa. ##inting. #"

"The controversy about whether or no. t this particular painting could really be an effect. ##ive political tool never leaves the painting. . #Picasso himself later on said that painting is not fo. ##r decorating apartments; it has a much b. roader social importance. #And I think partly the tour was a. ##bout finding confirmation of that be. lief. #"

Questions of meaning

    Considered a progenitor of M. ##odern Art and an originator of C. ubism, there were nonetheless several recurrent themes in Picasso's. ##work. #Instead of using tradi. tional battle imagery as visual inspiration for Guernica, Picasso turne. ##d to the familiar arena o. f the Spanish bullring. #Picasso was only three when his father took him to. ##his first bullfight.. #The brutal choreography — fierce power and inevitable tragedy — had obsessed. ##him since. #Accordi. ng to art historian, Patricia Failing: "The bull and the horse are important char. ##acters in Spani. sh culture. #Picasso himself certainly used these characters to play many different r. ##oles over t. ime. #This has made the task of interpreting the specific meaning of the bull and the hor. ##se very. tough. #Their relationship is a kind of ballet that was conceived in a variety of ways throu. ##gho. ut Picasso's career. #"

In his studio Picasso kept a large wicker mask of a bull, and often play. #. #ed out scenes from the bullring. #Is the bull Picasso himself. #The artist, gazing helpless and hor. r. ##ified at the surrounding holocaust. #Do the horse and the bull represent the fight between Loya. lists. ##and Nationalists, the stalwart Spanish people and Franco's brutal regime. #Or the ongoing s. truggle. ##between the female and male, perhaps a reflection of the artist's personal life. #Was the. enemy evid. ##ent in the work, or were all of the subjects victims. #"Sometimes the bull is seen as. a symbol of Sp. ##ain, as a symbol of the virtues and the values of Spain and Spanish culture," say. s Failing. #"Someti. ##mes the relationship is one of gender and a sort of masculine force and femin. ine force. #Sometimes i. ##t's a relationship of aggressor to something more passive. #Sometimes it'. s a relationship between da. ##rkness and light. #So the bull can be the good guy, or the bull can b. e the bad guy, depending on whi. ##ch interpretation you happen to dig up in your in your survey of. reactions to Guernica. #"

In the p. ##ast, Picasso has also drawn the bull in the form of the Minot. aur — a mythological creature, half bea. ##st, half human — his thinly veiled alter ego in a battle. of the sexes with the women in his life. #H. ##is earlier works are filled with bulls and Minotaurs. charging, goring, killing, raping. #But many al. ##so depict bulls as the victims of suffering. #Sta. nding enigmatically in the background, the bull in. ##Guernica was interpreted alternately as the br. utish Fascist state and the Spanish people. #Picasso n. ##ever committed to a specific explanation o. f his symbolism: ". #this bull is a bull and this horse is. ##a horse. #If you give a meaning to cer. tain things in my paintings it may be very true, but it is no. ##t my idea to give this meaning. #Wh. at ideas and conclusions you have got I obtained too, but instinc. ##tively, unconsciously. #I make. the painting for the painting. #I paint the objects for what they are. ##. #"

The central figure in. Guernica is a horse run through with a javelin, wrenched in agony. #Some. ##interpreted the horse a. s Franco's Nationalism, with Picasso predicting its downfall. #But other, op. ##posite meanings make. more sense in the overall context. #The portrayal of the people as a helpless a. ##nimal dying a se. nseless death, without the light of hope, is certainly a disturbing idea. #"Picasso. ##made a very p. oignant personal statement about the horse in Guernica being connected to the idea of t. ##he suffer. ing of the people," adds Failing. #"And since it's an animal with a big lance wound through. ##its c. enter, certainly that's a connection many people would find quite plausible. #But Picasso was. ##mad. deningly inconsistent about what he had to say about these particular characters, although he did. #. #n't like to say very much at all about them. #He knew that it's better to not say something and all. o. ##w the interpreters to fill in the space. #That gives them something to do. #It makes them think. abou. ##t you more. #"

Years after the completion of Guernica, Picasso was still questioned time a. nd time a. ##gain about the meaning of the bull and other images in the mural. #In exasperation he s. tated emphati. ##cally: "These are animals, massacred animals. #That's all as far as I'm concerned.. #" But he did rei. ##terate the painting's obvious anti-war sentiment: "My whole life as an artist h. as been nothing more. ##than a continuous struggle against reaction and the death of art. #In the pi. cture I am painting — wh. ##ich I shall call Guernica — I am expressing my horror of the military ca. ste which is now plundering. ##Spain into an ocean of misery and death. #"

Speculations as to the e. xact meaning of the tortured im. ##ages are as numerous and varied as its viewers, and perhaps this. was exactly Picasso's intention. #A. ##composition so compelling challenges our most basic notions o. f war as heroic, unmasking it as a bru. ##tal act of self-destruction. #source

https://www.pbs.org/. treasuresoftheworld/a_nav/guernica_nav/mai. ##n_guerfrm.html..
