##The Art of War: Examining Picasso’s Guernica as a Tool for Leader Professional Development

Suffe. ri. ##ng is an enduring theme in art, and the tradition of painting violence, pain, victims, and opp. ressor. ##s has long been a source of expression for artists experiencing conflict. #Fransisco de Go. ya’s Disas. ##ters of War is a shockingly graphic eye-witness depiction of the victims of guerrilla. warfare in Nap. ##oleon’s Peninsular Campaigns. #George Grosz’s 1917 faintly-cubist Explosion portra. yed the destructiv. ##e bombing of Berlin in the Great War. #[1] Images of victims and oppressors ev. oke emotions in specta. ##tors, stoking societal anger with an intent toward political change. #Guer. nica, Pablo Picasso’s 1937. ##oil-on-canvas masterpiece of the Spanish Civil War, is believed by som. e to be the single greatest w. ##ar painting of all time. #[2] Beyond being a massive allegorical de. piction of the horrors of war, it. ##can be argued Picasso’s painting purposefully served to mold sp. ectators into proactive participants. ##, encouraging both social action and policy decisions. #[3]. In this effort, Picasso sought to influ. ##ence changes in national policy and increase discourse b. eyond the borders of his war-torn nation. #T. ##his calculated creation of a powerful masterpiece sh. ould be examined and appreciated as part of a gr. ##eater wartime narrative. #More importantly, the. study of wartime art can be a valuable addition to t. ##he professional development of military lead. ers, generating options for professional dialogue about. ##how societies see the victors, the vanqui. shed, and the value of conflicts through the lens of artist. ##s and cultural patrimony. #The events. that birthed Guernica were simultaneously subtle and striking:. ##an insidious creep of National So. cialism in Spain under the rise of General Francisco Franco Bahamo. ##nde throughout the 1930s, punc. tuated by the April 26th bombing of the Spanish city of Guernica by th. ##e German Air Force in 1937. . #Conducted at the behest of General Franco, the bombing followed his eff. ##orts to consolidate po. litical power by merging Spain’s numerous Nationalist political parties. #At t. ##he time of the bom. bing, Picasso was already advocating against Franco and championing the previous d. ##emocratically-. elected government from his seat as the Director-in-Exile of the Museo Nacional del Pr. ##ado in Mad. rid:

The Spanish struggle is the fight of reaction against the people, against freedom. #. ##My who. le life has been nothing more than a continuous struggle against reaction and the death of art. ##.. #How could anybody think for a moment that I could be in agreement with reaction and death. #When. #. #the rebellion began, the legally elected republican government of Spain appointed me director of th. e. ##Prado Museum, a post which I immediately accepted. #In the panel on which I am working which I. shal. ##l call Guernica, and in all my recent works of art, I clearly express my abhorrence of the m. ilitary. ##caste which has sunk Spain in an ocean of pain and death. #[4]

Following the bombing, Pi. casso began. ##work on the mural, intending to display the piece at the Spanish Pavilion for the Par. is Internation. ##al Exhibition that summer. #While a political impetus to paint had always been pre. sent for him, the. ##painting’s catalyst was the devastating bombing and gave the new work a clearly. resonant theme and e. ##motional stimulus. #[5] Picasso completed the initial sketches in early May. , and the painting itself. ##was finished by the end of June. #How did Pablo Picasso, father of mode. rn expressionism and one of. ##the greatest painters of all time, convey such a singularly powerful. image of Fascism and bombing wi. ##th only oil paint and three canvas panels. #Picasso’s imagery rea. ched beyond the typical eyewitness. ##depictions seen in the works of his predecessors. #By arrangin. g three independent images—the agonize. ##d mother and dead child, the Minotaur, and the injured hor. se—Picasso tied allegorical elements toget. ##her for a broader statement on war. #Though each has a. nuanced meaning, they are ultimately grouped. ##as a broader statement about destruction and streng. th, and “depicts the effects of brutality that st. ##rikes from nowhere; it speaks of suffering and. of hope. #”[6] In his authoritative work on the deepe. ##r context of Guernica’s independent images,. Rudolf Arnheim noted the artist’s “destruction of realis. ##tic shape is selective. #”[7] The choic. e to depict the lifeless child in the arms of its mother, her. ##agonized expression over her lifele. ss progeny, was calculated by the artist. #Her body is as anatom. ##ical as Picasso ever intended a. woman to be, which is not all that uncommon for Picasso’s female mod. ##els. #Her expression is clea. r even as her physical features morph; her thigh, arms, and breasts forc. ##e the viewers’ attention. to the lifeless child cradled in her arms. #[8] “[W]omen and children [were. ##] often presented by. Picasso as images of perfection. #In the innumerable paintings and drawings, he. ##celebrated their. beauty and grace. #An assault on women and children is… directed against the very. ##core of mankin. d. #”[9]

Tristes presentimientos de lo que ha de acontecer (Gloomy presentiments of w. ##hat must c. ome to pass). #Lo mismo (The same). #Tampoco (Nor do these). #These sacred images for Pica. ##sso—in. nocence and maternity—played a central role in his narrative of destruction and violence. #The. ##Mi. notaur was already prominent in Picasso’s etchings and gouache sketches throughout the 1930s. #[1. #. #0] At times, it suggested violence and brutality, often opposite images of frightened women. #At ot. h. ##er times, the Minotaur became a traditional metaphor for truth, horrified at its reflection in. a mir. ##ror or light. #[11] Wherever Picasso’s art work depicted the bull-headed half-man, the unde. rlying me. ##ssage was of truth and innocence checking violence and evil. #[12] Guernica’s Minotaur. was no differ. ##ent. #The creature appears to witness the violence of war with both eyes wide open;. its gaze turned. ##on the destroyed innocence of the mother and dead child. #The horse “epitomizes. the suffering of Gue. ##rnica,” but also the perseverance of its people. #[13] Like the Minotaur, th. e single image could hav. ##e stood alone, but Picasso chose to complement it with smaller images: n. umerous daggers evoking viol. ##ence, a severed arm still clutching a broken sword suggesting the re. solute determination of a nation. ##in war, and a burning torch of enlightenment. #[14] The broken h. orse is a grim reminder of war, ano. ##ther victim at the hands of universal, unseen villainy. #Yet,. even in suffering, a broken nation can. ##rise above the violence and continue toward hope. #In exa. mining the timeline of Picasso’s monumenta. ##l effort against a backdrop of war, a lesson emerges:. well-timed art shapes the social narrative of. ##war. #Picasso’s deliberate choice to paint for disp. lay that summer sought to capitalize on the immed. ##iate reports coming from the battlefield. #The. images were selected to evoke passion and discourse o. ##n wartime policy and raise funds for the Sp. anish relief effort. #Even the artist’s choice of venues. ##was deliberate: high profile exhibitions. and museums in democratic nations where open political deba. ##te was still permitted. #[15] In the. months preceding the April 1937 bombing, Picasso accepted the c. ##ommission for the Paris Internat. ional Art Exposition’s Spanish Pavilion opening that summer. #Within. ##days of the bombing, he bega. n compositional studies for the mural, often re-sketching and overpaint. ##ing throughout May and Ju. ne until the piece was officially displayed on July 12th. #[16] The mural’s. ##public reception ulti. mately won Picasso a Grand Prix for graphic art at the 1937 Paris Exhibition,. ##where it remained o. n display until November of that year. #Following a brief tour of Scandinavia, Pi. ##casso coordinat. ed with the National Joint Committee for Spanish Relief for Guernica to tour in Londo. ##n as a fund. raising effort in 1938. #[17]

In April of 1939, the same pattern was repeated by the Exe. ##cutive. Committee of the Spanish Intellectual Aid for an American tour. #[18] This included negotiati. ##ons. with the head curator of the New York Museum of Modern Art for display, contingent on the recove. #. #ry of profits from the exhibit to the Medical Bureau of the North American Committee to Aid Spanish. . ##Democracy and the organization’s Spanish Refugee Relief Campaign. #[19] The 1939 Museum of Moder. n Ar. ##t exhibition, Picasso: Forty Years of His Art, opened on November 15, 1939, kick starting a. nation-w. ##ide tour that lasted until 1952, when the mural went to South America and then took a Eu. ropean Grand. ##Tour. #Picasso was proactive in selecting where the mural would be shown and who wou. ld see it, rema. ##ining in close contact with Alfred H. #Barr Jr. #, the Museum of Modern Art’s hea. d curator, to coord. ##inate for each display around the world. #[20] Guernica returned to, and rema. ined at, the Museum of. ##Modern Art in 1957, interrupted only by brief loan exhibitions in Chicago. and Philadelphia. #By this. ##time, Guernica was firmly established in the art world as a modern mas. terpiece, transcending its ro. ##le as a wartime rally-point to become the icon it is today. #Throug. hout his life, Picasso stood firm. ##by one stipulation for Guernica: for the mural to return to Spa. in, a democratic republic would have. ##to be established that included free elections. #Despite Fra. nco’s efforts to claim the painting in. ##1968, Guernica would not return to the nation of its names. ake city until September 9th, 1981, follow. ##ing the first free elections in 1977 and the adoption. of a democratic constitution a year later. #Pi. ##casso did not live to see his political end state. achieved. #He died in 1973 of congestive heart fai. ##lure at the age of 91 while still in exile in. France. #In the decades that have followed Picasso’s d. ##eath, Guernica has become a demonstration. tool for countless conflicts around the world, to include. ##anti-war protests in America following. the entrance into Iraq in 2003. #It was such a significant st. ##atement of anti-war sentiment that. a tapestry replica hung at the entrance to the United Nations Sec. ##urity Council room from 1985 un. til 2009 on loan from the Nelson A. #Rockefeller estate. #[21] Wherev. ##er recreations of the mural. appear, the message is typically a cry for peace in the wake of violent. ##conflict. #When leaders. re-examine their professional development programs, expanding these programs. ##to include the visua. l and fine arts presents unique options. #Like professional reading lists, the. ##fine arts offer op. portunities to explore both the history and societal views of war from an overlook. ##ed perspective. , the perspective of artists. #Artistic interpretation of events allows viewers to gli. ##mpse a soc. iety at a moment in time as well as an enduring perspective of a larger conflict, much lik. ##e Pica. sso’s epic mural was an interpretation of both Franco’s dictatorship and the discrete attack o. ##n. the town of Guernica. #While this inclusion of art into a leader’s professional development plan c.. ##an feel daunting and far outside the typical experience of military commanders, it is not insurmou. nt. ##able. #Museum curators can be a valuable asset in building lessons around specific educational. theme. ##s for leader professional development. #As the COVID-19 pandemic forced shelter-in-place d. irectives. ##and closed public and private museums, many institutions took the opportunity to either. make their c. ##ollections available online or build specially curated YouTube tours that allow peo. ple to visit thei. ##r collections from the safety of their homes. #In Spain, an online expatriate n. ewspaper published an. ##article with a catchy title “Prado in your PJ’s. #”[22] Madrid’s Museo del. Prado now hosts a daily. ##hour-long live tour on Instagram, simulcast on Facebook, in an attempt to. both scratch the itch of m. ##useum goers around the world and maintain a connection to the people. whose experiences shaped the co. ##llection they display today. #[23] Museums like the Prado, and ar. twork like Guernica, have never bee. ##n more accessible for immediate public appreciation, includin. g military professionals and defense po. ##licy makers. #The need for connection and relevance has f. orced cultural institutions to find new way. ##s to reach potential patrons. #For now, there is an o. pportunity for strategists and tacticians alike. ##to see and understand the art that has been shape. d by—and can shape the narrative of—war. #source. ##source
https://thestrategybridge.org/the-bridge. /2020/7/13/the-art-of-war-examining-picassos-guernic. ##a-as-a-tool-for-leader-professional-developm. ent..
